Delayed rendering (#1)
terminal-labs/salt-enhancement-proposals: delayed-state-rendering.md

- Feature Name: Delayed State Rendering
- Start Date: 2019-06-21
- SEP Status: Draft
- SEP PR: (leave this empty)
- Salt Issue: (leave this empty)
- Author: Joseph Nix, nixjdm at terminallabs dot com, [nixjdm@GitHub](https://github.com/nixjdm)

# Summary

> This SEP proposes a way of delaying rendering of portions of states until after other states have executed.

Author: The `of delaying rendering of portions of states` is a bit of a tongue twister. Its written correctly but every time I read it I mess it up and have to slowly re-read it to correct myself.

I would replace with `to delay rendering of selected states` or `to delay rendering`.

> This SEP proposes a way of delaying rendering of portions of states until after other states have executed.

Author: A bit of a tongue twister, I keep having to read it slowly to not mess up.
```suggestion
This SEP proposes a way to delay rendering of selected states until after other states have executed.
```

Reviewer: I agree. The suggested change is not quite accurate though, since the sections render more than just states - and really don't even have to have any. I'll work on it.

Reviewer: Perhaps `states` is close enough. It's a lot easier to read. Changed locally.

> A fundamental aspect of Salt is the ability to come to a desired endstate by executing a single highstate. This is currently limited when encountering a particular, fairly common circumstance. Consider a state that is truly stateful, but has an unpredictable effect. That is, this state is idempotent, but you can't know ahead of time a particular effect it has - like a hash. If you want to write a second state that needs this unpredictable information at its render time, then these two states cannot exist in the highstate together. This is because the rendering of the entire highstate happens prior to the execution of any of the states, i.e. the second state needs the first to complete before its render.

Author: test

> Currently, to get around this issue, I often write orchestration states. Other Salt tools like beacons and reactors can be used too. These tools have great value, but when the desired outcome is just part of the idempotent desired state of a minion, I really just want them in a highstate. What I propose adds complexity to the highstate, but I think it's a worthy trade to get rid of the complexity of these workarounds. At least, the choice would then be left to the developer to use delayed rendering, or use an alternate solution like orchestration.

Author: Started talking with I's in this paragraph. suggest to replace with 'we' and 'you'.

Reviewer: Right, I thought I was being inconsistent there. I was going to convert to straight "I"s. Maybe I'll switch to we.

It is important to note that we don't want to mark a state directly to indicate its render should be delayed. Instead, we want the ability to mark *Jinja* as needing to be rendered later. We don't want to render a single state later - we want to render Jinja later that contains a state, or states. Doing this allows for loops, conditionals, [Salt's special context vars like `salt` and `grains`](https://docs.saltstack.com/en/latest/ref/states/vars.html), and the full power of the render machinery. This allows for accessing and building logic around data at delayed render time, where that data did not exist at the render of the calling state.

Here are several examples of how state files could use this

### Simple example calling a jinja block:

```salt
# init.sls
my_state1:
  mod.fun1:
    - do_something
    - delayed_render:
      - block: dependant_block_A

{% delayed_block dependant_block_A %}
my_state2:
  mod.fun2:
    - {{ data }}
{% end_delayed_block %}
```

> In this example, `my_state` indicates that `dependant_block_A` will be rendered and its states executed after it finishes. In this way, `delayed_render` can be thought of as a new kind of requisite. It is similar to `require_in` in that it helps determine an order of execution, and indicates what comes later. It is different, in that `delayed_render` determines what will be executed **immediately after** this state. It also does not simply point to another state. Instead, `delayed_render` points to a block of Jinja defined by the custom Jinja tag `delayed_block`. This block could contain any template code.

Author: Typo?

`my_state` should be `my_state1`

Reviewer: Changed locally.

Upon initial render of this state (as in a highstate or otherwise), the `delayed_block` Jinja tag effectively cuts all of the text in the block, and stores it in memory on the Salt master, and associates it with the original job. When `my_state1` finishes, the minion calls back to the master, indicating that the `delayed_block` `dependant_block_A` should be rendered, and any states within it executed, on the same minion.

### Simple example calling an sls file:

```salt
# init.sls
my_state1:
  mod.fun1:
    - do_something
    - delayed_render:
      - sls: my_state_file
```

```salt
# my_state_file.sls
my_state2:
  mod.fun2:
    - {{ data }}
```

> This is a very similar example, except that instead of a `delayed_render` indicating a particular `delayed_block`, `delayed_render` specifies an entire sls file to render and execute when `my_state1` finishes.

Author: Not the clearest
```suggestion
This is a similar example, instead of  a `block` tag indented under `delayed_render` targeting a state in the *same* file; you have a 'sls' tag enabling you to target a *separate* state file.
```

Reviewer: Changed locally.

### Multiple delayed_renders

```salt
# init.sls
my_state1:
  mod.fun1:
    - do_something
    - delayed_render:
      - sls: state_file1
      - block: dependant_block_A
      - sls: state_file2
      - block: dependant_block_B
```

This state must be a precursor to many things. Since `delayed_render` contains a list, we can mark multiple blocks and sls files. This state indicates that two sls files and two blocks should be rendered after it finishes executing, and they should be rendered and executed in this particular order; `state_file1`, then `dependant_block_A`, etc.

## Edge Cases

> Since the requisite and delayed render is so generalized, the user can potentially do complicated things.

Author: ```suggestion
Since the requisite and delayed render is so generalized, the user can potentially do multiple step automation without user intervention after initial kick off.
```
